*********

Welcome to iDOC= - the international CBM documentation project!

The goal of iDOC= is to preserve (non-English) Commodore related documents
in electronic text format that might otherwise cease to exist with the rapid
advancement of computer technology and declining interest in 8-bit computers
on the part of the general population. If you would like to help by
converting Commodore related hardcopy documents to electronic texts please
contact the manager of iDOC=, Peter Krefting, at peter@softwolves.pp.se.

Extensive efforts were made to preserve the contents of the original
document. However, certain portions, such as diagrams, program listings, and
indexes may have been either altered or sacrificed due to the limitations of
plain vanilla text. Diagrams may have been eliminated where ASCII-art was
not feasible. Program listings may be missing display codes where
substitutions were not possible. Tables of contents and indexes may have
been changed from page number references to section number references.
Please accept our apologies for these limitations, alterations, and possible
omissions.

Document names consists of a reasonably short unique title, followed by the
document language. Two optional fields follow; first the document version (0
for incomplete texts, version 1 is usually unnumbered), and then the
document source, if there are more than one. Finally, the document is given
a .txt extension.

The author(s) of the original document and members of iDOC= make no
representations about the accuracy or suitability of this material for any
purpose. This etext is provided "as-is". Please refer to the warranty of the
original document, if any, that may included in this etext. No other
warranties, express or implied, are made to you as to the etext or any
medium it may be on. Neither the author(s) nor the members of iDOC= will
assume liability for damages either from the direct or indirect use of this
etext or from the distribution of or modification to this etext. Therefore
if you read this document or use the information herein you do so at your
own risk.

*********

The iDOC= etext of the Blood'n'Guts manual, converted to text by peter
karlsson <peter@softwolves.pp.se>

bloodnguts_en.txt, April 2000, etext #65.

*********

Blood'n Guts
Commodore 64/128


Loading

Disk: Insert the diskette with side one upwards. Type LOAD "*",8,1 and press
RETURN. The disk will load and run automatically.

Cassette: Insert the cassette. Press SHIFT and RUN/STOP simultaneously. Then
press PLAY and the game will load and run automatically.


Controlling Blood'n Guts

You select all functions with the joystick in port two. Player one uses the
joystick in port two and player two uses port one.


Selecting fighters

When the main game has loaded you will be able to select your fighter with
the joystick connected to port two. Press fire when you have selected the
first fighter. If there is two fighters competing against each other, move
the joystick to another fighter and press fire. Else, press fire without
moving the joystick.


Comprete or Practise
On the following screens you can select if you want to compete or practise.
If you choose compete, the different events will load one by one. If you
choose practise, you will be able to play one event as many times as you
wish. After every trial you will be asked if you want to fight again or not.

Disk: You can practise in any of the ten events by selecting it on the
screen. When you answer NO on the 'Play Again' question you will return to
the main menu.

Cassette: You will load one event and then practise the event until you feel
that you are good at it. After that the next event will appear.


Tug of War
You can compete against another fighter or against a droid.
  Joystick down - A small dose of energy
  Press fire - A little more energy
  Joystick down and fire pressed - A high dose of energy
You must use your energy with caution. When the energy is drained out you
can't pull anymore. The loser will drown.


Towerjump
You must jump as far as possible from the tower. Pull the joystick down and
release it to jump. To make an approved jump you must land on your head.
Press the button when the head is facing downwards. On the far right of the
screen you can see how far the droid or competitor jumped. You have three
attempts to make a longer jump.


Rockroller
You have to roll a huge rock up a steep mountain. Two players are competing
at the same time. You create your energy by moving the joystick up and down.
When the meter is blue you have enough energy to take a step. Press the
button to take a step. The competition is won by the fighter that wins at
least two of the rolls.


Beer drinking
Dring a barrel of beer faster than you opponent. Pull the joystick up to
start drinking and then swallow by moving the joystick as fast as possible
to the right and left. If you spill any beer you are disqualified.


Human Hit
Throw stones at a barbarian. Aim the joystick and press fire to throw the
stone. You have to hit the four different targets three times each and you
have to do it as fast as possible.


Pole Fight
In this event you either compete against you opponent or against a droid.
Sitting on a log you have to knock down your opponent with a tree club. Use
the joystick to control the club.


Cat Thröwing
You have three attempts to throw the cat as far as possible. Start to rotate
by pressing the fire button. When you think that your speed is enough, press
the fire button to throw the cat. If you wait to<sic!> long the barbarian
will get tired.


Mountain Walk
You have to reach the middle of the rope as fast as possible. The barbarian
that reaches the centre will start to shake the rope until the other
barbarian falls down.


Axe Thröwing
Throw axes at your opponent. You throw one axe and the opponent tries to
avoid the axe and then you change. AIm the axe by pulling the joystick in
the right direction. You can avoid the axe by jumping over it or duck.


Arm Wreck
Pull the joystick to the left and right to gain strength in your arm. The
barbarian that loses will be marked by a bird.


The End
The barbarian that loses will get what he deserves!


Credits
(c) 1986 American Action AB. All rights reserved worldwide. Created by Greve
Graphics for American Action AB, Box 10090, 200 43 Malmö, Sweden. Package
design by Charles McNewson. Front cover illustration by Chris Valentine.
Unauthorised copying, lending, broadcasting or resale without written
premission from American Action AB is strictly prohibited.

*********

End of the iDOC= etext of the Blod'n'guts manual.

*********
