[2.] Peripherals: Displays, Disk Drives, Printers, and More

    In this chapter you'll learn:
    * What "peripherals" are and why they're needed
    * What peripherals are commonly used with the Commodore 128
    * What peripherals are available from Commodore
    * How peripherals attach to the Commodore 128

When you buy a car, you probably also purchase a certain number of options:
probably an automatic transmission and power steering, perhaps air
conditioning, or tinted glass, or a stereo tapedeck. Some of these options
are essential to the operation of the car, some are conveniences, and some -
like racing stripes - are merely ego-boosters. A similar situation exists
when you buy a computer: there are many options besides the computer itself
- some essential to the operation of the computer, some less essential. In
the computer world these options are called "peripherals," meaning that they
sit around your computer, on its "periphery." Peripherals commonly used with
the Commodore 128 are display devices, disk drives, printers, and modems.

If you want to see the output from your computer, you'll need some sort of
display device: either a TV set or monitor. If you want to store programs or
data when the computer is turned off, you'll need either a cassette tape
storage device or a disk drive. If you want to print out programs or other
data on paper, you'll need a printer; and if you want to communicate over
telephone lines with your computer, you'll need a modem. And this is just
the beginning; there are many other peripherals as well.

Just as it is difficult to decide which options to buy (and which you can
afford) when you buy a car, there may seem to be a bewildering array of
peripherals to choose for your computer. In this chapter we're going to
introduce you to the world of Commodore 128 peripherals, explaining what
they are, reviewing what is available in the marketplace, and suggesting how
to choose which equipment is right for you. We'll then explain just how
these peripherals are attached to the Commodore 128. This is not a simple
topic. There are so many plugs, openings, ports and connectors of different
shapes and sizes on the Commodore 128 that it's necessary to explain which
kind of peripheral plugs in where, and why.

We'll start off by talking about what's already built into the Commodore
128. From this discussion, the reason for needing some peripherals will
begin to emerge.

[2.1] What's Already Inside the Commodore 128

We've mentioned several different kinds of peripheral devices that may be
necessary for your computer system. But what comes with the computer itself?
What don't you need to buy?

  The Keyboard

As you can see from Figure 1-1 in the last chapter, the Commodore 128 looks
as if it's mostly a keyboard. This keyboard is the way that you, the user,
will most commonly put information into the computer. However, the nicely
styled plastic case that houses the keyboard contains many other things as
well.

  Chips

First and most importantly, the Commodore 128 contains the handful of
"chips" (complex circuits etched onto a small crystal of silicon) that
control the computer's operation. As a user you probably won't need to know
much about these chips. If you're not interested in technical details, you
can skip the next few paragraphs.

At the heart of the Commodore 128's circuitry is the 8502 microprocessor.
This chip is a close cousin of the 6502 chip which powers the Apple II,
Atari, and other computers. The 8502 controls the operation of the Commodore
when it is in C64 mode and C128 mode. In CP/M mode, an entirely different
microprocessor is used, the Z80A.

In addition to the microprocessor chips, the Commodore 128 also has
specialized chips to control graphics, sound, and communication with
peripheral devices. Graphics is handled by a chip called the VIC II, for
"Video Interface Chip." In 80 column mode (which we'll discuss below),
another chip is used, the 8563, which can display twice as many dots per
line as the VIC II chip. Sound is controlled by the SID, or "Sound Interface
Device." The SID chip is the same one that was used in the Commodore 64
computer. There are two chips to handle communications with peripheral
devices: they're called CIAs, for "Complex Interface Adaptors."

  Memory

There are other chips which constitute the memory of the Commodore 128. The
memory is divided into two parts: a permanent part which is filled with
information at the factory, called ROM (for Read Only Memory); and a
temporary part which can hold programs or data generated by the user, called
RAM (Random Access Memory). The Commodore 128, as its name implies, contains
128K of RAM memory. (One "K" is equivalent to 1024 bytes (or characters), so
the C128 actually holds 131,072 bytes). This is twice as much as the
Commodore 64.

Something to remember about the RAM in your computer is that any programs or
data that are stored in it will disappear when the power is turned off. Thus
it is not a good place for permanent storage of programs or data. We'll have
more to say about this when we talk about cassettes and disk drives.

  Connectors

The last major category of components built into the Commodore 128 itself is
the various plugs and connectors which allow it to communicate with its
peripheral devices. We'll cover these in the last part of the chapter.

In the sections that follow we'll talk in turn about each of the broad
categories of peripherals; then we'll discuss how these devices are
connected to the C128. In later chapters we'll talk more about the kinds of
peripherals which are particularly suitable for each of the three modes.

[2.2] Display Devices

A display device is the only peripheral you absolutely must have to operate
your Commodore 128. This display device can be an ordinary TV set, or it can
be a video monitor. What's a monitor? It's very similar to a TV set, except
that it can't receive TV broadcasts. Thus it offers a sharper picture than a
TV set, because the signals from the computer don't need to go through the
complex circuitry intended for TV broadcast reception. There are several
different types of monitors, so choosing a display device is not a simple
task. It depends on what you want to use your computer for, how good a
picture you like to look at, and how much you want to spend. Let's review
the available options.

  The TV Set

The least expensive display device for your Commodore 128 is an ordinary
home TV set. This is an excellent choice if you want to play games or use
other simple programs. For these uses a color set is preferable, since
almost all computer games make use of color. Since almost everyone has a TV
set, this option usually doesn't cost you anything. Of course, if you only
have one TV set, and you want to use your computer in a different room than
where you usually watch TV, then you might find yourself wanting a second TV
set; a somewhat more expensive proposition. In this case you should consider
a monitor, to be described below.

To use your TV set with the computer you'll need a small box which contains
a switch, so you can switch the TV back and forth between the computer and
the normal TV antenna. This box is provided by Commodore along with the the
C128. To use it, simply plug the cable from the computer into the switchbox,
and plug another cable coming from the box into your TV set.

The major disadvantage of a TV set is that the resolution, or amount of
detail you can see, in a TV image is fairly limited. For pictures - such as
those you'll find in games and simple educational programs - a TV set works
very well. But for text - such as program listings - it is less
satisfactory: the letters and words are somewhat fuzzy, and can be tiring to
read.

  The Direct Video Color Monitor

Because text can be difficult to read on a TV set, different kinds of
monitors are available, all of which offer clearer pictures than the
standard TV does. You should consider a monitor if you will be using your
computer for writing with a word processing program, or for working with
spreadsheet or financial programs, or if you plan to spend a substantial
amount of time writing your own programs. You might even want a monitor
simply because you don't have a TV, or don't want to use your TV with your
computer.

The least expensive color monitor available for the Commodore 128 is called
a direct monitor, because the picture signals from the computer don't go
through the broadcast-decoding circuitry as they do on a standard TV set.
Here, one cable plugs into the computer, but is split into three separate
plugs where it plugs into the monitor: one wire for sound, and two for
special picture signals called lump and chrome. Commodore is unique among
makers of small computers in using this kind of monitor. Most
computer-makers use something called a composite monitor, in which the luma
and chroma signals are combined in one wire. The Commodore approach offers a
clearer picture, but you must buy a special monitor, made by Commodore, to
take advantage of the system.

Commodore builds a direct monitor which has been very popular with users of
the Commodore 64 computer: the 1702 color video monitor. You can also use a
composite monitor, although the picture will not be quite as sharp. Other
manufacturers produce inexpensive (under $200) composite monitors. Somewhat
higher-quality composite monitors cost around $350.

Although a direct monitor offers a clearer picture than you might obtain
with a TV set, it may still not be clear enough for all purposes.
Specifically, it will display 40 columns of characters, but not 80. Let's
see what this means.

  40-Column Versus 80-Column

The Commodore 64 - the predecessor of the Commodore 128 - displays text of
one size only. Forty characters (letters or numbers) just fit on one line of
the screen: that is, there is one character in each of forty columns, so the
letters are fairly large, and can be read even though they're a little
fuzzy. This same way of displaying text is used when the Commodore 128 is
used in C64 mode.

However, when you're typing a letter with a typewriter, you can usually get
more than 40 characters on a line: closer to 80, in fact. This is also true
of documents printed out on a computer's printer. Many people who use a
computer for word processing, or for other business uses, want to see a line
of text on the computer screen which corresponds more to what they will see
when the letter is printed out. For this reason, most business computers use
an 80 column display mode, which fits 80 characters on each line.

The Commodore 128 computer lets you choose between a 40-column and an
80-column display. This is done by depressing a key on the keyboard.
However, if you select the 80-column display, you'll need to use a monitor
which will clearly display letters this small (half the size of the letters
in the 40-column display). A TV set cannot be used in 80 column mode, and a
composite monitor lacks sufficient resolution. To use this mode, you need a
new kind of monitor called an RGBI monitor.

  The RGBI Monitor

More expensive than the direct or composite monitors, but with a
substantially better picture, is an RGBI monitor. RGBI stands for
Red-Green-Blue Intensity. In this type of monitor, signals containing
information about these three colors and the intensity are sent on four
separate wires from the computer to the monitor. This results in a very
clear color picture, since the signals for the colors are not first mixed in
the computer and then unmixed in the monitor, as they are in direct and
composite monitors.

Because an entirely different set of signals coming from the Commodore 128
is used for the RGBI monitor, a different connector on the back of the C128
is used for this kind of monitor than is used for a composite monitor or TV
set. In fact, it's possible to have both kinds of monitors connected
simultaneously, showing different pictures. (We'll show these connectors in
the last section in this chapter.)

Many manufacturers make RGBI monitors. They vary widely in price: the better
the picture you want, the more you must pay. The highest quality monitors
sell for $750 or more, but good RGB monitors are available for around $400.

Figure 2-1 shows the connections for the various types of color displays.

A potential problem to note with the Commodore 128 is that you can't use an
RGB monitor in 40 column mode. This is unfortunate, since it means that to
use all the modes on your C128 you really need two monitors: direct (or
composite) and RGB. Fortunately, Commodore has solved this problem.

At the same time it introduced the C128 computer, Commodore also announced a
new monitor: the 1902, shown in Figure 2-2. This monitor, which costs less
than $300, actually combines several monitors in one. You can use it either
as a composite monitor, or as an RGB monitor, switching from one to the
other by means of a switch on the front panel. Since it also accepts a
composite signal, this monitor can also be used to display regular TV
pictures, if you connect it to your VCR.

  Figure 2-1. Connections for Different Displays
  [Picture describing the various ways of connecting a C128 to a display
   device:
    * From the TV connector to the Radio Frequency Signal input of a TV
    * From the Video connector to the Chroma/Luma/Audio inputs of a direct
      monitor
    * From the Video connector to the Composite Picture Signal/Audio input
      of a composite monitor
    * From the Video connector to the Audio input and from the RGBI
      connector to the Red/Green/Blue/Intensity inputs of a RGBI monitor

  Monochrome Monitors

If you plan to use your computer mostly for word processing, or for business
programs such as spreadsheets and database programs, your best bet might be
what is called a monochrome monitor. Like a black and white TV set, this
monitor doesn't show a color picture; it is usually either black and amber
or black and green. This monitor can be obtained for less than $200, and
offers a much sharper picture than even an ROB monitor. If you're going to
spend all day gazing at words or program listings on the screen, and you're
not interested in full-color games, this option has a lot to offer.

If you're going to use the 80-column mode, make sure that the monochrome
monitor you choose has enough resolution to handle this degree of detail;
not all of them do.

  Figure 2-2. 1902 Color Monitor
  [Omitted]

[2.3] Program Cartridges

Program cartridges aren't exactly peripherals in the sense a monitor or disk
drive is. The cartridge slot (the connector where the cartridges plug in) is
already built into the Commodore 128, so there is no major purchase to make
to use this peripheral. The sole purpose of program cartridges is to provide
a convenient way for software manufacturers to distribute their product.
Only the manufacturer can put a program in the cartridge, so you can't use
it to store programs of your own, as you can with a cassette or disk drive.

The program cartridge itself is a plastic box about the size of a deck of
cards. Some software manufacturers like it because it is almost
indestructible, and the program inside can't be conveniently copied.
However, cartridges are more expensive to produce than disks, so other
manufacturers avoid them.

There is a considerable variety of commercially produced software available
on program cartridges for the Commodore 64, which will also work on the
Commodore 128 in the C64 mode. These programs are fairly inexpensive,
ranging from around $19 to $40 for games, and up to $100 for more serious
programs. It remains to be seen whether software developers will use this
format for programs written specifically for the C128 mode.

Something to remember about program cartridges is that you should turn off
the power to the computer before plugging in the cartridge. If you don't do
this, you run the risk of damaging the computer, or the cartridge.

[2.4] Cassette Units

When you turn off the power to your C128, everything you've stored in its
internal RAM disappears. If you've written a long program and want to use it
again without having to type it in again, this can be discouraging. You need
some sort of permanent storage device, where programs and other data, such
as letters you've written with a word-processor program, can be stored more
or less permanently. Such long-term storage devices are sometimes called
mass storage, since they can hold more data than can the memory in the
computer. Program cartridges won't serve the purpose because, while they do
store programs, you can't write your own programs on them; you can only read
the manufacturer's program from them into your computer.

Cassettes offer the most inexpensive form of mass storage for your Commodore
128. A cassette unit is similar to the small cassette tape recorders used
for playing music, and in fact it uses the same kind of cassette tapes. On
many small computers it's possible to use any kind of cassette recorder, but
the Commodore 128 uses a special kind of cassette recorder called a
Datasette, made only by Commodore. (The Datasette records digital signals,
rather than the analog signals used in other recorders. This makes it
somewhat more reliable.) It is the most inexpensive way to store your
programs and data, but it is also slow: you'll spend a long time waiting for
a program to load.

Most users who start with a cassette recorder eventually upgrade to a disk
drive, so our advice is to start off with a disk drive if you can possibly
afford it. Over 90 percent of Commodore 64 users chose a disk drive over the
Datasette, and this figure will probably be similar for buyers of the
Commodore 128.

[2.5] Disk Drives

After a display device, a disk drive is probably the most popular peripheral
for most personal computers.

Like cassettes, disk drives serve two principal purposes: they are a medium
on which commercial software can be made available to your computer; and
they also allow you to save, more or less permanently, programs or other
data which you've created yourself However, they offer far better
performance than a cassette drive. At somewhat less than
$300, the disk drive represents a relatively serious investment, but it is so much faster and
more reliable than a cassette unit that it is worth the price for most users.

It is possible to use old-style Commodore drives, which were built for use
with the Commodore 64, with the new Commodore 128. The most popular drive
built by Commodore for the C64 was the 1541, a single drive unit (meaning it
would hold only one disk at a time). Dual-drive units are also available
from other manufacturers. All of these units will also work on the Commodore
128. However, they do not take full advantage of one of the major
improvements of the Commodore 128 over the Commodore 64: the increased speed
of the disk drives.

For the C128, Commodore has announced an entirely new line of disk drives.
The single drive model is the 1571, shown in Figure 2-3. This drive operates
in three modes, corresponding to the three personalities of the Commodore
128 computer. In C64 mode, it's completely compatible with the old 1541
drive, and runs at the same speed as the old drive. In C128 mode, it runs
five times faster; and in CP/M mode, it runs faster still - and is also
compatible with most existing CP/M formats. The dual-drive version of the
drive is called the 1572.

  Data Transfer Speed

What does this speed advantage of the new drive mean to you? The old 1541
drive ran at about 320 characters per second. If you had a five page letter
or program listing of, say, 15,000 characters, it would take 46 seconds to
transfer with the old drive (or with the new drive in C64 mode). In C128
mode, the new drive runs at 2000 characters per second, so the same document
will take only 7.5 seconds to transfer. In CP/M mode, it's even faster: 3500
characters per second, for a 4.2 second transfer. If you've ever sat waiting
for a long program to load on your Commodore 64, you'll know that this
increased speed is is not just a gimmick: it can really make your life
easier. The longer the programs you write or use, and the more you operate
your computer, the more you'll appreciate the increased speed of these
drives. The new 1571 drive also stores twice as much information on a disk:
340K bytes, versus only 170K for the older 1541 drive.

    The new 1571 intelligent disk drive can transfer data up to ten tines
    faster than the older 1541 disk drive.

  Figure 2-3. 1571 Disk Drive
  [Omitted]

[2.6] Printers

You can have a lot of fun playing games and writing programs on the
Commodore 128 without ever printing anything out. However, if you want to
use your C128 for word processing, or for other serious business programs
like spreadsheets, or if you want to write really long BASIC programs, then
you'll need a printer so you can save the results of your work on paper.

The kind of printer you need depends on how fast you want your output
printed, how good you want it to look, and how much money you want to spend.

The least expensive kind of printer is called a dot-matrix printer. This
kind of printer is fast, but the printed characters have that made of dots
computer look to them. If you intend to write serious business letters on
your computer, you will probably want what's called a letter quality
printer. These printers are more expensive, and use some form of
typewriter-like mechanism to form the letters, so the printing is much
cleaner. However, these printers are usually slower than dot-matrix
printers.

Commodore did not announce any new printers specifically for the Commodore
128, but they manufacture a variety of dot-matrix printers which work very
well for the Commodore 64 and which are also perfect for the C128. These are
the MPS-801, the MPS-802, and the MPS-803. The 801 and the 803 are the least
expensive. The 802 is a heavier-duty machine suitable for business. All
these printers can print not only text, but graphics (pictures). Being able
to print graphics is useful if you are interested in computer art, or if you
need to generate graphs and charts.

Other manufacturers also make printers that can be used with the Commodore
128. Notice however, that if a printer has not been built specifically to
work with the Commodore, you'll need an adaptor (a small box or a special
plug) to make the printer work with the computer. MSD Systems and CardCo are
two companies making the adaptors, which are priced between $50 and $150
(addresses are shown in the back of the book). Even with the adaptor, not
all printers will print graphics, so be sure to check that the printer does
what you expect before you take it home.

For serious business use you'll probably want a letter quality printer, such
as the Commodore DPS-1101. This produces copy like that typed on a
good-quality office typewriter; but it's somewhat slower than the dot-matrix
printers.

[2.7] Modems

One of the fastest growing uses of personal computers is the field of
telecommunications. This means using your computer to send and receive data
over the telephone lines. Why would you want to do that? You might want to
send a program to a friend in another city. Or you might be interested in
accessing one of the on-line database services, such as CompuServe or The
Source. These services give you instant access to the latest stock prices,
weather reports, movie reviews, and other data. They also let you
communicate with groups of people who share a common interest, such as stamp
collecting or electronic music. These groups are called SIGs, for special
interest groups. There is, for example, a SIG for Commodore computers on
CompuServe. These groups offer free programs, free advice, and a forum for
discussion.

The most important variance between different kinds of modems is that of
speed: how fast can the modem send or receive a certain amount of
information? A slow modem can take a long time to transmit even a small
amount of information; so if you plan to use a modem extensively, a fast one
is a good investment.

The slowest modems used today are rated at 300 baud. What does baud mean?
Very roughly, the baud rate is the number of characters per second the modem
can send, divided by 10. Thus, a 300 baud modem can send about 30 characters
per second. (This definition isn't exactly right, but it's close enough to
give you an idea how fast modems work.)

Commodore sells a variety of modems: the 1600 and the 1650, which have been
around for some time, and the newer 1660 and 1670, which were introduced
with the C128 computer. The first three are 300 baud modems, while the 1670,
shown in Figure 2-4, runs at a brisk 1200 baud. While the 300 baud modems
range in price from $40 to about $100, the 1670 will set you back about
$200.

In addition to Commodore, there are a wide variety of other modem
manufacturers, including Hayes, Human Engineered Software, and Anchor
Automation. Some of these modems are designed to plug directly into the
C128, but others will require an adaptor called an RS-232 interface module,
which costs about $50 and can be obtained from several manufacturers,
including Commodore and MSD Systems.

Besides speed, modems are also distinguished by features such as: Will the
modem automatically answer the telephone? Will it automatically dial the
phone to make an outgoing call? In the Commodore line, all but the 1600 have
these autoanswer autodial features. However, the 1650 and 1660 require
special software to use these features. For instance, if you want to dial a
number, it is the software that generates the clicks for each digit you
dial. In the 1670 on the other hand, the modem itself generates the clicks;
all the software needs to tell it is what number to dial. The 1670 is thus a
"smart" modem, which makes it compatible with a wider variety of
communications software.

    A modem should be one of the first peripherals you own. With it, you can
    shop from home, access the latest stock prices, weather reports, movie
    reviews, electronic bulletin boards, and perhaps best of all, obtain
    free programs.

  Figure 2-4. 1670 Modem
  [Omitted]

[2.8] Joysticks

For games and various other programs you'll probably want to buy one or more
joysticks or similar devices. Joysticks are small handheld levers that let
you input up-down left-right directional information directly into the
computer. Most joysticks also include a button, which is used to fire guns
or lasers in computer games.

Besides joysticks, there is a variety of other devices that act more or less
like joysticks, including trackballs, mice, touch tablets, and paddles. Some
users prefer one or the other of these devices, and some games or programs
are designed to work with a particular device. However, the joystick is the
most popular of such devices, and is a good start for anyone interested in
games.

Note that not all such devices can be used with any given program. Joysticks
and trackballs are mostly compatible with each other, in that they both
transmit information about direction to the computer: is the stick pointed
north, northeast, east, or where? Touch tablets, mice, and game paddles, on
the other hand, send a position to the computer. They often work in
conjunction with a pointer on the computer screen, which is positioned at a
particular place.

[2.9] Other Peripheral Devices

The variety of peripheral devices made for the Commodore 64 and the
Commodore 128 is truly staggering. There are speech synthesis and
recognition devices, as well as peripherals to open your garage door, check
your house for burglars and fire, and operate your model trains. With the
proper equipment you can get your C128 to draw engineering drawings, respond
to your touching its screen, or synthesize music from a piano-like keyboard.
We won't describe these esoteric devices here. What we've said about the
more common peripherals should be enough to begin thinking about what you'll
need for your Commodore 128.

[2.10] Connecting Peripherals to the Commodore 128

Any peripheral device you buy is connected to the Commodore 128 by plugging
it into one of the openings on the side or the back of the C128. There are
quite a number of these connection ports, in a wide variety of shapes and
sizes. It's easy to get confused and try to connect things in the wrong
place, so this section will describe these connectors, and explain which
peripheral gets plugged into which connector.

The first group of connectors we'll talk about is located on the right side
of the Commodore 128, as shown in Figure 2-5.

   Be Careful

   Connecting peripherals to the Commodore 128 is as simple as connecting
   the components of a stereo system - usually, there is only one way a
   connector can be plugged in. Because some of the Commodore 128 connectors
   contain voltages from inside the computer, it is a good practice to turn
   off power before plugging or unplugging peripherals. Never plug or unplug
   ROM cartridges or peripherals connected to the user port without first
   turning off the power.

  Figure 2-5. Right Side of the Commodore 128
            _____  _____        __    __    |
            \___/  \___/   []  |__|  |__|   |
        ¯¯¯¯¯¯|¯¯¯¯¯¯|¯¯¯¯¯|¯¯¯¯|¯¯¯¯¯|¯¯¯¯¯
  Controller Port 1  |     |    |     Power
     Controller Port 2     | On/Off Switch
                Reset Button

  Power and Reset

On the right side of the Commodore 128, closest to the back, is the power
connector. One cord from the power supply plugs in here. The power supply is
a small box, about 6 inches long, which converts house current to the lower
voltage used by the C128. Next to the power connector is the on/off switch.

Notice that although this switch turns off the power to the computer, the
power supply itself keeps going. You might want to unplug the power supply
from the wall outlet if you're not going to use the computer for a while.
This will make the power supply last longer. You can also buy a "power
strip," a row of outlets with its own switch which plugs into the wall. This
is useful because you can plug your computer and all your peripherals into
it, and turn them all off at once with the switch on the power strip.

Next to the on/off switch is the reset button. This is used to restart your
machine without turning it on and then off again. You may need to restart it
if a program gets "hung up," and the computer will not respond to keyboard
commands. Also, some types of copy-protected software require you to reset
the computer before they will load. You can do this by turning the computer
off and then on again, but that's hard on the electrical components inside
the computer, so it's better to use the reset switch.

  The Controller Ports

The controller ports are for joysticks and similar devices. Attaching such
devices is fairly straightforward: you simply plug them in. Be careful,
however, if you're only using one joystick, to plug it into the correct
port. Software written by Commodore generally requires you to plug your
joystick into port number 1, while that written by other developers often
requires you to use port number 2.

The rest of the connections are found on the rear of the C128, shown in
Figure 2-6.

  Figure 2-6. Rear View of the Commodore 128
                 TV Channel Selector Switch    ,TV Output
  |   |¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯|  _______   ( )  ( ) \__   o'  ____                |
   \  |__________| |-------|   |    |   ¯¯       \__/  |¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯| /
    ¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯|¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯|¯¯¯¯¯¯¯|¯¯¯¯|¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯|¯¯¯¯¯¯¯|¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯
  Expansion Port       |       | Composite Video   |    User Port
  (Program Cartridges) |  Serial Port     RGBI Video Output
               Cassette Port

  The Serial Bus Connection

This connection is used for several different kinds of peripherals, most
commonly disk drives and printers. Technically, the word serial means that
each character or byte of information is sent in separate bits, one after
the other. Since each byte is composed of eight bits, this way of sending
information is theoretically eight times slower than sending each byte all
at once, as is done in a parallel connection. However, sending all eight
bits at once requires eight separate connectors, so the serial technique is
less expensive.

The word bus refers to a kind of data path used in the computer. The bus is
really more like a highway than a bus. Data is sent down the bus to a
variety of different destinations. Like cities lying along a highway,
peripherals can occupy different positions along the bus. Let's look at this
arrangement in more detail.

   Daisy-Chaining

An unusual feature of the serial bus connector is that more than one
peripheral can be plugged into it. How is this possible? Through a technique
called daisy-chaining. This means that the first peripheral is plugged
directly into the serial bus connector on the back of the computer. Then the
second peripheral is plugged, not into the computer, but into the first
peripheral. The third peripheral is plugged into the second, and so on.
There can be as many as five different peripherals connected to the
Commodore's serial bus connector. This process is shown in Figure 2-7.

A question that might occur to you is, if all these peripherals are on one
cable, how does the computer know which peripheral it's talking to when it
sends a message out this connector?

    Because the Commodore 128 uses intelligent peripherals that can
    communicate over a daisy-chained serial bus, connections are simpler
    than on other computers, and expanding the system is also easier.

  Figure 2-7. Daisy chained Peripherals
  [Picture of a Commodore 128 connected to a disk drive, which is in turn
   connected to another disk drive, and in its turn a printer]

   Intelligent Peripherals

To understand how the serial bus connector works, you should know that the
Commodore 128 can make use of a special kind of peripheral device called an
intelligent peripheral. In this regard the Commodore is unusual in the
computer world. Most computer systems can only use what can be called "dumb"
peripherals. The computer tells them exactly what to do, and they report
back every little thing that's going on inside them, and can make no
decisions without the computer's help. The C64 and C128, on the other hand,
can use peripherals that perform complex tasks all by themselves. The disk
drive, for instance, can format a disk, keep track of what programs are on a
disk, and read and write programs from the disk, without any help from the
computer itself.

This intelligence also permits the computer to communicate with a particular
peripheral, even though there are several peripherals connected to the
single serial bus connector. Every time the computer sends a message to a
peripheral, such as a request to the disk drive to send a file, it sends
something called a device number along with the message. Each peripheral has
its own device number, and when it sees the message going down the cable, it
checks to see if the number on the message is addressed to it. If the disk
drive is device #8, for example, and the message is for device #4 - the
printer - the disk drive will ignore it; but the printer will accept the
message and do what the message says, probably to print out a particular
file.

Now you know why only certain peripherals, those built especially for the
Commodore system, will work on the C128. They must be intelligent
peripherals, capable of interpreting the special messages sent from the
computer.

   Networks and File Servers

Another use for the serial bus connector is to connect a number of C128s or
C64s together so that they can all share certain peripherals - commonly a
disk drive and printer. This is a popular system in schools, where it's more
economical to give each student only the keyboard unit, and buy a disk drive
and printer that will serve an entire class. In such a system, each computer
is connected - via the serial bus - to a box called a file server. The file
server is, in turn, connected to the printer and disk drive.

[2.11] The User Port

The user port is a connection on the right-hand side on the rear of the
Commodore 128. It is most commonly used for modems, but it is also used for
a variety of more esoteric peripherals, such as voice synthesizers, model
train controllers, and so forth. It is, in many ways, like the RS 232 port
which is standard on many other computers - but there are differences - so
that standard RS 232 equipment, such as modems, will not work. Modems and
other equipment which use this port must be specially modified to work with
Commodore equipment. This port is the same on the C128 as it is on the old
C64, however, so that any equipment that is attached to the user port on the
C64 will work on the C128.

To attach a Commodore modem to this port no cable is needed: you simply push
the modem right into the port. Of course, you must then connect the modem to
the telephone, following the instructions for the particular modem. It is
possible to use standard RS-232 equipment with this port, but you'll need a
special adaptor to make it work with the C128.

  The TV Output and Channel Selector Switch

This small round outlet is where you plug in the cable if you're using a
standard TV set. The cable actually connects the computer to the switchbox,
which is, in turn, connected to the TV. The channel selector switch is set
to channel 3 or 4, whichever channel is not used (or is weakest) in your
area.

  Composite or Direct Video Connector

This connector is the leftmost of the two large round connectors on the rear
of the C128.This kind of connector is called a DIN connector. The cable
coming out of it separates into several RCA-type jacks (the kind you use to
connect your hi-fi equipment together). If you're using the direct color
monitor, these jacks go to three separate connections on the back of the
monitor, labeled chrome, luma, and audio. If you're using the composite
monitor, there are only two jacks to connect to the monitor: the video
signal and the audio signal.

  The RGB Video Connector

This is the small oblong D-connector. It connects directly to the back of
four different jacks: red, green, blue, and audio.

  The Expansion (or Program Cartridge) Slot

This is a simple connector to use, but its effect on the computer is rather
complicated. The most common use of this slot is for plugging in program
cartridges. This is easily done: you turn the computer off, plug in the
cartridge, turn the computer on again, and the game or whatever program is
in the cartridge takes control of the computer. Besides games, you can also
use this slot to change your computer from one which speaks BASIC into one
which speaks other computer languages, such as FORTH.

If you know something about how computers work, you'll be interested to know
that almost every interior signal in the Commodore 64 and Commodore 128
computers is made available on this connector, including the data bus and
the address bus. Thus, whatever is plugged into the slot can completely take
over the operation of the computer, changing it into a machine with
different characteristics. It's even possible to plug in a different
microprocessor chip here, so that the computer assumes an entirely different
personality. The C64 uses this capability to turn itself into a CP/M
computer with the aid of an optional cartridge; on the C128 this capability
is built into the computer.

  The Cassette Port

The type of connector used for the cassette port is called a Molex. A cable
from the Commodore Datasette recorder or another recorder specially designed
to work with the Commodore 128 plugs in here.

Now that you know what peripherals are available for the C128 and how to
hook them up, you're ready to find out more about the three modes of the
Commodore 128 Personal Computer: the C128 mode, the C64 mode, and the CP/M
mode. In our discussion of each of these modes we'll have more to say about
which peripherals are suitable for which mode.

